Preparation for WG LC (#118)
IETF-TEAS-WG/actn-poi: draft-ietf-teas-actn-poi-applicability.md

## Terminology

This document uses the ACTN terminology defined in {{!RFC8453}}.

In addition, this document uses the following terminology.

Customer service:
: The end-to-end service from CE to CE.

Network service:
: The PE to PE configuration, including both the network service
layer (VRFs, RT import/export policies configuration) and the
network transport layer (e.g. RSVP-TE LSPs). This includes the
configuration (on the PE side) of the interface towards the CE
(e.g. VLAN, IP address, routing protocol etc.).

Technology domain:

> : shot for "switching technology domain", defined as "region" in {{!RFC5212}}, where the term "region" is applied to (GMPLS) control domains.

Author: ```suggestion
: short for "switching technology domain", defined as "region" in {{!RFC5212}}, where the term "region" is applied to (GMPLS) control domains.
```

PNC Domain:

> : part of the network under control of a single PNC instance. It is subject to the capabilities of the PNC which technologies are controlled.

Author: ```suggestion
: part of the network under control of a single PNC instance. It is subject to the capabilities of the PNC which technology is controlled.
```

Port:
: The physical entity that transmits and receives physical signals.

Interface:
: A physical or logical entity that transmits and receives traffic.

Link:
: An association between two interfaces that can exchange traffic directly.

Intra-domain link:
: a link between two adjacent nodes that belong to the same PNC domain.

Inter-domain link:
: a link between two adjacent nodes that belong to different PNC domains.

Ethernet link:
: A link between two Ethernet interfaces.

Single-technology Ethernet link:

> : An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on physically adjacent IP routers.

Author: ```suggestion
: An Ethernet link between two Ethernet interfaces on physically adjacent IP routers.
```

Multi-technology Ethernet link:
: An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on logically adjacent IP routers, which is supported by an underlay tunnel in a different technology domain.

Cross-technology Ethernet link:
: An Ethernet link between an Ethernet interface on an IP router and an Ethernet interface on a physically adjacent optical node.

Inter-domain Ethernet link:
: An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on physically adjacent IP routers that belong to different P-PNC domains.

Single-technology intra-domain Ethernet link:
: An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on physically adjacent IP routers that belong to the same P-PNC domain.

> Multi-technology intra-domainEthernet link:

Author: ```suggestion
Multi-technology intra-domain Ethernet link:
```

> : An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on logically adjacent IP routers that belong tot he same P-PNC domain, which is supported by supported by two cross-technology Ethernet links and an optical tunnel in between.

Author: ```suggestion
: An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on logically adjacent IP routers that belong to the same P-PNC domain, which is supported by supported by two cross-technology Ethernet links and an optical tunnel in between.
```

> : An Ethernet link between between two Ethernet interfaces on logically adjacent IP routers that belong tot he same P-PNC domain, which is supported by supported by two cross-technology Ethernet links and an optical tunnel in between.

Author: See issue #122

IP link:
: A link between two IP interfaces.

Single-technology intra-domain IP link:
: An IP link supported by a single-technology intra-domain Ethernet link.

Inter-domain IP link:
: An IP link supported by an inter-domain Ethernet link.

Multi-technology intra-domain IP link:

> : An IP link supported a multi-technology intra-domain Ethernet link.

Author: ```suggestion
: An IP link supported by a multi-technology intra-domain Ethernet link.
```

- technology-specific mechanisms (in the case of inter-domain SR-TE,
the binding SID) are used for the inter-domain TE path stitching;

> - each packet domain in {{fig-vpn-topo}} uses technology-specific local protection mechanisms (such as Fast Reroute (FRR) in case of MPLS-TE or Topology Independent Loop-free Alternate Fast Reroute (TI-LFA) in case of SR-TE), with the awareness of multi-layer TE path properties (e.g., SRLG).

Author: ```suggestion
- each packet domain in {{fig-vpn-topo}} uses technology-specific local protection mechanisms (such as Fast Reroute (FRR) in case of MPLS-TE or Topology Independent Loop-free Alternate Fast Reroute (TI-LFA) in case of SR-TE), with the awareness of multi-technologyTE path properties (e.g., SRLG).
```

- the network topology, at both optical and IP layers, in terms of
nodes and links, including the access links, inter-domain IP links

> as well as Cross-technology links;

Reviewer: Should be a "Cross-technology **Ethernet** links" as per new terminology, correct?

Author: ```suggestion
as well as cross-technology Ethernet links;
```

optical layers (e.g., which port, lambda/OTSi, and direction are used
by a specific IP service on the WDM equipment).

> In particular, for the Cross-technology links, it is key for MDSC to

Reviewer: Cross-technology **Ethernet** links should be used everywhere in the document according to the terminology definition made at the beginning

Author: Done in https://github.com/IETF-TEAS-WG/actn-poi/pull/118/commits/ee540dfe2e2edce459a4dd672956804b2c11b01b

> In particular, for the Cross-technology links, it is key for MDSC to

Author: ```suggestion
In particular, for the cross-technology links, it is key for MDSC to
```

packet exchange and does not send any LLDP packets.

### Cross-technology link Discovery {#cross-technology-link-discovery}

The MDSC can discover a Cross-technology link by matching the plug-id
values of the two LTPs reported by two adjacent O-PNC and P-PNC: in
case LLDP snooping is used, the P-PNC reports the LLDP information
sent by the corresponding Ethernet interface on the IP router while the
O-PNC reports the LLDP information received by the corresponding
Ethernet interface on the optical node, e.g., between LTP 5-0 on PE13
and LTP 7-0 on NE11, as shown in {{fig-cross-technology-link}}.

{::include ./figures/cross-technology-link.md}
{: #fig-cross-technology-link title="Cross-technology Ethernet link discovery"}

As described in {{optical-topology-discovery}}, the LTP terminating a Cross-technology link
is reported by an O-PNC in the Ethernet topology or in the OTN
topology model or in both models, depending on the type of
corresponding physical port on the optical node.

It is worth noting that the discovery of Cross-technology links is based
only on the LLDP information sent by the Ethernet interfaces of the

> routers and received by the Ethernet interfaces of the optical nodes.

Author: ```suggestion
routers and snooped by the Ethernet interfaces of the optical nodes.
```

{: #fig-inter-domain-link title="Inter-domain Ethernet and IP link discovery"}

Different information is required to be encoded by the P-PNC within

> the plug-id attribute of the Ethernet LTPs to discover cross-technology Ethernet

Author: See issue #121

> the plug-id attribute of the Ethernet LTPs to discover cross-technology Ethernet

Author: See #121

same Ethernet interface, e.g., both the Ethernet LTP 3-0 and the
Ethernet LTP 3-1, supported by LTP 3-0, shown in {{fig-inter-domain-link}}:

- The physical Ethernet LTP (e.g., LTP 3-0 in BR11, as shown in
{{fig-inter-domain-link}}) is used to represent the physical adjacency between the
Ethernet interface on an IP router and the Ethernet interface on its physically adjacent node,
which can be either an IP router
(in case of a single-technology Ethernet link) or an optical
node (in case of a multi-technology Ethernet link).
Therefore, as described in {{cross-technology-link-discovery}}, the P-PNC reports,
within the plug-id attribute of this LTP, the LLDP information
sent by the corresponding Ethernet interface on the IP router; such as the
{BR11,3} and {BR21,4} plug-id values reported, respectively, by
the Ethernet LTP 3-0 on BR11 and by the Ethernet LTP 4-0 on BR21,
as shown in {{fig-inter-domain-link}};

- The logical Ethernet LTP (e.g., LTP 3-1 in BR11, as shown in
{{fig-inter-domain-link}}), supported by a physical Ethernet LTP (e.g., LTP 3-0 in
BR11, as shown in {{fig-inter-domain-link}}), is used to discover the logical

> adjacency between the Ethernet interfaces on IP routers, which can be either

Author: See issue #121

single-technology or multi-technology. Therefore, the P-PNC reports, within
the plug-id attribute of this LTP, the LLDP information sent and
received by the corresponding Ethernet interface on the IP router; such as
the {BR11,3,BR21,4} plug-id values reported by the Ethernet LTP 3-1 on BR11 and by the Ethernet LTP 4-1 on BR21, as shown in {{fig-inter-domain-link}}.

> It is worth noting that in case of an inter-domain Ethernet links, the MDSC cannot discover, using the the LLDP

Reviewer: remove one "the"

Author: ```suggestion
It is worth noting that in case of an inter-domain Ethernet links, the MDSC cannot discover, using the LLDP
```

information reported in the plug-id attributes, the physical
adjacency between the two Ethernet interfaces on physically adjacent IP routers, because these

> two plug-id values do not match, such as the plug-id values {BR11,3}

Author: See issue #121

supported respectively by the Ethernet LTP 3-1 on BR11 and by the
Ethernet LTP 4-1 on BR21, as shown in {{fig-inter-domain-link}}.

{: #multi-technology-link-discovery}

## Multi-technology IP Link Discovery

A multi-technology intra-domain IP link and its supporting multi-technology
intra-domain Ethernet link are discovered by the P-PNC like any other
intra-domain IP and Ethernet links, as described in {{packet-topology-discovery}}, and
reported at the MPI within the packet and the Ethernet network
topologies, e.g., as shown in {{fig-multi-technology-link}}.

{::include ./figures/multi-technology-intra-domain-link.md}
{: #fig-multi-technology-link title="Multi-technology intra-domain Ethernet and IP link discovery"}

The P-PNC does not report any plug-id information on the logical
Ethernet LTPs terminating intra-domain Ethernet links, such as the
LTP 5-1 on PE13 and LTP 6-1 in BR11 shown in {{fig-multi-technology-link}}, since these
links are discovered by the PNC.

In addition, the P-PNC also reports the physical Ethernet LTPs that

> terminate the Cross-technology links supporting the multi-technology intra-domain Ethernet links, e.g., the Ethernet LTP 5-0 on PE13 and the

Author: ```suggestion
terminate the cross-technology Ethernet links supporting the multi-technology intra-domain Ethernet links, e.g., the Ethernet LTP 5-0 on PE13 and the
```

multi-technology intra-domain IP links and therefore the path within the
optical network that supports a multi-technology intra-domain IP link,
e.g., as shown in {{fig-multi-technology-link}}.

{: #single-technology-link-discovery-discovery}

### Intra-domain single-technology IP Links

It is worth noting that the P-PNC may not be aware of whether an
Ethernet interface on the IP router terminates a multi-technology or a
single-technology intra-domain Ethernet link.

In this case, the P-PNC, always reports two Ethernet LTPs for each
Ethernet interface on the IP router, e.g., the Ethernet LTP 1-0 and 1-1
on PE13, shown in {{fig-intra-domain-link}}.

{::include ./figures/single-technology-intra-domain-link.md}
{: #fig-intra-domain-link title="Single-technology intra-domain Ethernet and IP link discovery"}

It is worth noting that in case of an intra-domain single-technology
Ethernet links, the MDSC cannot discover, using the LLDP information
reported in the plug-id attributes, the physical adjacency
between the two Ethernet interfaces on physically adjacent IP routers,
because the two plug-id values do
not match, such as the plug-id values {PE13,1} and {P16,2} shown in

> {{fig-intra-domain-link}}. However, the MDSC may infer the physical intra-domain

Author: See issue #121
